Source : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=53yPfrqbpkE

Transcript :

getting open welcome everybody
so we'll start with the apologies and on
guess we have hazel everyone else seems
to be here I think so could I little
mover please Andrew just just before you
did just before you do and I had to
leave the meeting at 1:30 to attend a
future-proof meeting so sorry about that
so my apologies from mean good as cold
thanks Jim
so we what shall we include that and
though in the and and in the motion as
well if someone would like to move
please may be amazed might thanks Lou
thanks Susan
all in favor I like contrary no that's
carried disclosure of members interests
do we have any today no won't we've onto
item for late items any late items no
late items so confirmation of order of
meeting no changes kin now I don't see
any need for for change we do have a
number of van geese to announce at the
meeting today but they're well we're of
the time so yes I'm hoping those of the
earthly of the require time thanks crime
a second
thanks Susan I think what she is all in
favor please say aye aye country no
carried okay
item 6 which is confirmation within
minutes from 18 February if we all take
those as being reared anything raised
from those minutes in Graham speaking my
diary's showing me that I was at their
meeting but my name's not recorded it
right Ã¶zkan I was going to bring that up
to so you think you some mistake thanks
Bruce okay so I'm sure we can have that
remedied Sam yes we'll make the changes
thank you okay so
that change could I have a mover for the
minutes to be received as a trim quick
Rico please thank you Marcus Sikandar I
figured it thanks Bruce
all in favor please say aye aye country
no carried thank you
item 7 Jason his Jason joined us he has
preceded seemed nodding off hi Jason
here you're doing good thank you
great the floor is yours okay Sam I
don't thing we hit as we hit a shoe
they're trying to get the presentation
is that right oh no it seemed a shearing
brilliant perfect thanks Sam good
morning or good afternoon sorry everyone
thanks for allowing me time just to give
you a quick update on where we are as a
sector for tourism and particularly for
wiper district so a report has obviously
been provided to you and prepared which
was our last six months performance at
the end of 31st December 2019 as you
would have seen Waipa District Council
was going through a significant growth
pretty one of the fastest growing
regions for us with regards to tourism
impact you were experiencing
double-digit growth pretty much down
through visitor expenditure and also
commercial accommodation but we are here
today to discuss this that obviously a
bit of a change in the dynamic given
Kover than the impact for tourism
particular sector next slide theme
perfect so just first a couple of slides
obviously I'm just covering off some
data we're now receiving international
in national data on a weekly basis from
the government and also from the
airlines so of no surprise obviously
since covert lockdown and international
travel restrictions were put in place
international visitor arrivals into New
Zealand has been he'll be dropping it at
a very sharp rate we still do have a
line connectivity which I will go
through because we are still maintaining
what we call a baseline service for
Connie
across the world mainly for repatriation
flights but also for cargo and service
across the country as well mix slides
mean things so weekly card transactions
again no surprise obviously overall our
visitor expenditure is down
significantly but when you do look onto
the left top five obviously food liquor
and pharmacies we are still seeing some
humor in some obviously weekly growth
and expenditure a computer all our other
because of the type of expenditure in
transactions as well think seem so the
impact for us is a sector again look I
mean everything all of this has been
reported but just to cover off in
summary we were already impacted through
the loss of China group travel we've
started and the second to last week of
January so with that all of our
international facing products our hotels
our motels our Airbnb a merely impacted
by that because many are trying to group
travel actually did stay on the Y cattle
they were our fourth largest and station
or visitor market behind Australia North
America in UK Europe it did shut us down
pretty much once international travel
restrictions hit us and the visitor
economy covers more than just the
tourism operators again with mention
accommodation it also impacts retail
hospitality transport providers our
operators of course but also event
organizers in major venues and of course
a mystery Creek of anti-drone in Lake
hope it'll a key event platforms for
wipeout district we have had significant
job losses in business closures across
tourism I have done underneath that last
bullet points look the immediate
business impact that we have been
coaching our businesses through and
helping them get through there's some
have gone to what we call temporary or
seasonal closure so again we have a lot
of seasonality and tourism many who
would closed for winter have closed but
those that potentially have never closed
before we've suggested they go into
hibernation and so that's what we're
calling temporary seasonal closures
we've had a number of businesses you
know Hobbiton was obviously one of the
most public
reported in the media but again all our
motels hotels retail hospitality have
pretty much reduced service and staff
there's only essential services
operating as we know but again with
elude level 3 we do see some opening up
potentially in the hospitality sector
for white power anyway and then the last
obviously implication for us as we have
here a number of businesses who
appearantly closing not only are these
are lost definitely to the tourism
industry to try and bring people back
when we don't hit products but also
particularly for those vulnerable
communities with some of these operators
have been going for many years
things seem sure have you got examples
of what businesses are struggling and
like what who isn't closing by who is
closing and how it is impacting her in
the water yeah so for wipeouts it was
mainly being your hospitality
potentially some of your retail and also
accommodation so we've had many nearly
all of your accommodation has pretty
much gone into hibernation or closure
they're calling it temporary closure but
the some have been able to access the
wage subsidy which is great but again
what we're going to see is the impacts
are longer than the 12-week wage subsidy
right now so it's post twelve weeks what
we're quite concerned about we have been
lobbying nationally the government and I
think that's all sectors not just
tourism around potentially extending the
wage subsidy for twenty weeks because it
will take a lot to restart the tourism
sector again people's propensity to
travel is quite low we will travel
locally and potentially we will travel
intra regionally so staying within the
region but to try and stand up the
domestic travel market is going to be a
long haul they were looking in at six to
twelve months recovery plan for their
great so lastly look I mean and no
surprise here this was just like we do
for industries people know we we all fit
so from the tourism perspective when we
respond
obviously we're providing the industry
support right now at a national level
regional level and also a local level
but then we have to Walker at
of Commerce helpers and associations and
all local government have been great and
actually supporting us with what we call
the business and community support site
for tourism businesses and then lastly
we were obviously partnered with the
civil defense network around providing
welfare support not just for tourism
operators again it's also been utilizing
tourism operators many of our caterers
have now been repurposed into providing
food services pretty much or supporting
the food banks and actually cooking
meals we also have a number of our
transport operators and tourism being
run basically requisitioned now to
provide transport options and actually
getting people around such as essential
workers in many of the staff potentially
we've been redeploying and to sort of
things need work through providing
security and welfare and call center as
well so not only are we also working
with sort of fence were also putting
stuff into beer as well
even though we're obviously dealing with
koba does it does for you to be aware
there are obviously continuing issues
that that were going on with some with
coffered and with the tourism industry
first up was domestic airline
connectivity so lucky and New Zealand
has been pretty open that they will not
be restarting and solute level once we
meet with them you don't weekly just to
see how we will try and stay in the
industry back up again they're going to
focus very much what we call an
incremental restart so it's doing a
what's in briefs strategy across the
country so potentially maybe only two or
three flights into Hamilton good day but
again is to try and give their reach
across the whole network first before
they can actually stand up and have a
full schedule like we have seen how to
Hamilton import particularly over the
last three to four years airline
connectivity internationally is still
continuing so those are just some a
summary of some of the ones that are
still flying
so again New Zealand are still
connecting into North America and Hong
Kong into Australia Fiji Airlines are
still flying into Fiji on the daily
service in Qatar has probably used the
most to try and repatriate Northern
Hemisphere travelers back to their homes
through Qatar and then also Korean
Airlines is still operating today
service as well for future again a New
Zealander saying they will be focusing
very much on the domestic market first
they will traditionally be a domestic
airline for the first six to 12 months
and domestic also includes Australia in
the Pacific American Airlines so far
been the only one would meet with who
plane to return to New Zealand from
October 2020 so they have put a stake in
the ground to say when they will start
flying into New Zealand again now the
reason why I was raised international
airline connectivity is because it will
take this country at least two to five
years before we ever go back to the type
of connectivity with head as a country
previously before lockdown so again it's
going to be a very long burn for us as a
country to regain the international
visitor arrivals have seen in the past
air traffic control services up for
review the reason why I just put Bettany
was just to let everyone know there was
no y cottle reports or or ear fields but
particularly hamilton e port isn't
impacted but for us in the central North
Island Rotorua is one that is going to
be impacted around potentially the
closure of air traffic control tower
services there will mean potentially
that we will be reading the domestic
network through Toronto and Hamilton so
unfortunately for all to do as last it
could be our gain and then lastly we've
still got the investigation underway
around for cardi white island so the
WorkSafe investigation should be coming
to a close shortly there will be impacts
on the tourism in suppliers around
adventure tourism for this country and
also we will be up waiting cual mark
which is their accreditation program
particularly around health and safety
for the country soon this means that
date size we are now filled days is
going online so from the 30th of June
for two weeks field days will be
providing a virtual exhibition space
there is similar to other international
events to offer this type of experience
again it is a trial but we do hope to
bring field days back in 2021 obviously
not only is the largest major event for
y power but it's definitely forward or
why cuddle with regards to eating on a
compact we would do to host New Zealand
tourism awards and November there has
been postponed until niche
we will receive the tape for that
exploring trends these are what we call
our two main international trade shows
they've obviously been delayed trains
2021 which is the main time when we
actually sell the work huddle to the
world we will not be having until maybe
June next year so is just awaiting on a
date for that to major convention
centers were due to open this year at T
PI and Christchurch which potentially is
the one there we'll be taking a lot of
business away for our stroll for
business events that has now been
delayed for another year and of course
there musial an International Convention
Center we will not know the reopening
date of there until they work through
there are the final insurance claims so
again by having these two convention
centers not operating means they're
places like cool ones in the mystery
Creek Event Center are going to be
filling the gap for national and
international conferences for the short
term which is actually a good
opportunity for us again as a region
postcode but we also do still have
events plane so the major events
obviously the National waka ama is at
this stage still plan to take it a man
to take take a take a feat and like cut
up you know and we also have our first
major event for the region the ICC
woman's Cricket World Cup scheduled for
the 8th of February again this one will
particularly be decided by around
October November whether we
international travel restrictions have
lifted to enable some of the players to
come otherwise they will have to go into
if it does continue into isolation until
the Cricket World Cup can be held so
what we have seen goods finically or
other parts of the Tito is that events
have been more postponed for why par and
for the wider Waikato region rather than
completely canceled and not returning so
there is some positivity for us as we do
see this as the lead sector turn to
recovery economically and socially for
the district it's sliding over spot
we have a three tiered response plan
obviously this is no stability everyone
else right now we have a mitigate
process with draconian now we didn't
have a restart phase and then we have a
reimagine phase so initially in the
response phase no different to pronounce
lots of briefings lots of support we
obviously them face to face briefings
across all the sector long before the
shutdown and now we've moved to the
virtual space so we're still doing ever
can see at a national level to try and
make sure you can exit small business
support for the region some of the gap
right now at a government support and
out of the support that's what I can
provide as it doesn't cover any
employees for a hundred employees plus
so that's quite there's quite the pointy
end of town we call it for most of our
region for our big employers again wage
subsidy okay but on the outside of there
there's actually no large industry
supports we'll be pushing it through
government let's try and unlock some of
that if this lockdown continues we've
been doing one on one operator chickens
we have 240 listed operators with us and
so again these are daily or to weekly
chickens by all our teams to make sure
you want to be able to access business
advice in some of the wage support we've
been doing webinars and we've now moved
in the last two weeks into workforce
redeployment so again we're being taking
some organizations or employers that
have maybe at least 5 to 10 staff
members displaced through to Hobbiton
who had one of the largest at around 270
and actually read deploying them and
offering them redeployment options and
to the kiwifruit industry we placed a
hundred and ten staff and to kiwifruit
with transport from hobbiton as well as
the avocado industry which will be the
next seasonal workforce will be will be
standing up until the end of the year
but put stuff into supermarkets sort of
fence security and also they've been
providing some services from home but
again what we are going to see over the
next two weeks and we're starting to
measure there is the full-on peaks of
people that we cannot read the point
there potentially will be out of work so
I think it's currently a survey underway
and we'll be updating all councils in
the government around the overall impact
for tourism is why cuts all things in
under the restart phase so again we want
to congratulate local government because
obviously I'm getting some of those
shovel-ready projects through with the
crown infrastructure partners for the
consideration is a great win for the
region but potentially for the sector
and pretty much every district has put
up around 1 to 2 tourism projects as
part of shovel-ready so again we do need
to focus on the future and how we will
restart the region research we were
already in market and about to finish up
our domestic perceptions and major
research this is now becoming quite
timely for us and will help us and form
around how we will try and bring back
the domestic travelers into the region
based on some of the research we've
undertaken we're also working on a major
in business events restart campaign so
there planning's been underway for a
couple of weeks so that when we're ready
to go we can push go on there we do see
events and business events and corporate
travel as being the Kickstarter we need
for economic and social recovery across
the region new developments again you've
all got new developments going on
potentially in your regions Hidden Lake
obviously one of your newest hotels in
Cambridge and you opened on Christmas
Eve so glean during the team we've been
keeping in touch with quite a lot
because they haven't been in operation
very long the Olympics are quite severe
so again making sure that we still have
some future developments and then we'll
continue across the region and to take
us through the next stage data and
insights I've touched on that now gone
to weekly so again we're sharing that
information in to Walker and now we've
contributing to the Taraki can I make
outlook as well which is great and then
lastly the mighty local campaign was
launched two weeks ago and it's
definitely around the restart phase
things seem so mighty local again was a
partnership with ourselves to Walker all
the chambers of commerce OTR mu-2 and
obviously Cambridge chamber of commerce
plus the way Qatar Chamber of Commerce
all our councils the business
associations it also exists in some
communities and all our regional
eyesight's
we're in phase one so for the last two
weeks we've been promoting businesses
with contactless delivery promoting you
know people that are still doing
entertainment online or virtually from
within why cuttle recently from our
beloved shifts well-being and for
and this week we launched business
stories so again we're starting to use
this platform to promote some of the
businesses and how they're pivoting into
obviously response or looking at
different opportunities for their
business so the idea is to try and give
people hope during phase one during
phase 2 which is obviously from a looot
level 3 we will increase your takeaway
and Ethan beam listings and also
essential services are starting to grow
as well and phase 2 we will move more to
a local phase at the moment it's a
regional platform but the idea is
potentially people were able to group
the types of information in services
available at a local level and at
district level as well and then phase 3
which has been hopefully all travel
restrictions are lifted
we will then activate the basically the
the buy local eat local event local shop
visit in explore within the region and
obviously there's some partnership with
many communities in business
associations they'd already have local
programs such as Cambridge with their
totally locally Cambridge campaign so
we're working with Kelly and the team
around how we would try and push their
program rather than this one once we get
to phase 3 they seem and when it comes
to how we will actually respond long
term so at the moment we're in phase 1
so we're calling it the hyper local
phase so 1 to 3 months we'll be pushing
basically localism everything to do with
obviously how you purchase and interact
with your local community at phase 2
which then we'll move into a three to
six month break it we're estimating we
can then start to do ensure regional
travel so we'll be targeting the drive
market within the wirecutter region we
hopefully starting to stand up community
events again they can happen at a local
level and regional business meetings
might be able to begin again with social
distancing it level 3 which is what
we're planning our scenarios for 6 to 12
months we can then stand up the domestic
market there is wind potentially we will
mainly focus on Drive so if you've heard
me say before 2.5 potentially 3 million
people live within three hours radius of
the Waikato region including the region
itself so we'll definitely be focusing
on the drive market
national beans will be returning as well
as national meetings and then eventually
corporate travel which again business
are quite a good lead for us with
regards to the sector again and then
lastly we're planning on one to two
years before we actually start to see
any sort of international impact again
short-haul markets into Australia in the
Pacific will open first and then we will
eventually move back into major events
international conferences and starting
to bring me the corporate and leisure
travel market into what cuttle so that's
the timeframe we are currently doing our
scenario thinning format is we all know
it may change every week based on the
other levels we have seen and then
lastly reimagined
so you would have seen that last week or
actually two weeks ago as well the
government announced that there was a
call to reshape and reimagine the
tourism industry so we have been pushing
for the last two to three months with
tourism New Zealand and the Minister for
tourism around what we're calling a
reimagining of tourism when we go there
is our chance that this is more than a
shock that's actually a bit of a circuit
breaker for the sector and for all
business sectors for us all to look and
see how could we do our businesses
differently we all knew that tourism was
growing in quite an exponential rate and
there were some areas that were really
feeling the pressure such as Queenstown
in Central Otago in Cathedral Cove some
of our sites Mount amadito
so for us now it's great to see the
government are taking this seriously so
we're now working with tourism New
Zealand to lead a new plane domestically
and internationally but also look at all
these types of questions you know we're
our previous visitor arrivals and
spiritual growth right for the region
what mall succeeds to look like for us
for the future for a visitor market here
we movie I'll stick to from boom and
bust again no different to the food and
fibre sector or any other business cycle
and lastly how do we move to a more
sustainable community lead tourism and
for us and the way cuts are what we call
creating need benefit rather than just
benefiting those that potentially we're
making money out of tourism we want to
see communities thrive and then they
have the decision around what sort of
tourism they want so again we will be
moving out
sixteen tourism opportunities plane
which many of you were involved in we
will now be developing a destination
management plan and it'll be happening
nationally as well to try on what we
call transform tourism for the Vita so
we there is no such word as recovery now
we will not be receiving the same sorts
of level of tourism as we did previously
but neither we might not have the same
sort of services and opportunities
available in tourism as well postcodes
so again it is a good opportunity for us
to look at transforming the sector look
and lastly just obviously a cool I call
it to all my local government partners I
really appreciate everyone having to
promote your race relief for missions
and installment policies not just for
the tourism sector but for all business
it's great to see you all continue with
your resource consumed crisis maybe in a
more delayed way but again the liquor
and food licensing is going to be more
important for us particularly try and
stand up after a looot level 3 we still
have the regional major event strategy
activation so again we are still
awaiting some a decision from well
energy trust about potentially having to
establish a regional major event fund
which will actually assist all the
districts to be able to bid for major
events again and also to attract and bid
new major events into our shoulder
season across the region and then lastly
again just to thank you all for your
continual funding to support the tourism
industry and then it would obviously be
more important through restart in the
reimagine phase and again the point I
made earlier we will not be recovering
to pre covert levels for at least to
five years as a sector and as a region
there's a pretty much it from me I think
so he'll be to take any questions
thanks thanks Jason
that's I got to say that's a fantastic
response to what must have been a
massive shock to the industry yeah and
of course in white power and probably a
lot of Waikato as well it domestic
tourism sexually a lot bigger than
international so we really want to see
and as you have in your plan that being
being worked on as soon as it's sooner
that becomes a possibility but yeah does
anyone have questions just put your
hands up I can see you all clear
okay um yes thanks a lot Jason and yeah
fantastic if and I think been put in by
all your team you know in this situation
a couple of questions well the first one
was that I noticed that in the regional
major event strategy there's a new
funding partner mentioned is that the
well energy relationship or is it
alright great useful as well energy yeah
no that's great and the other thing is
for your reimagining you know the future
of tourism I'd saw that you had your
stakeholders listed I didn't see the
Department of Conservation being not
that they are a tourism operator but
most of them you know popular
destinations you know I think a
cathedral cove you know they're actually
managed by the department and and I just
want to be worthwhile trying to get them
so around the table so that because I
hear you know they worry about the
pressure points that we were
experiencing and that you know just
having their input you know might be
beneficial these they look absolutely so
you're sorry about their clear the
Department of Conservation are part of
it so it's actually a joint tourism New
Zealand in doc review of tourism and
it's only because they they both
actually contributed to the national
tourism LTL or strategy so they are
definitely part of it we don't obviously
have a lot of any national parks but we
do still have a lot of Crown Estate in
some of the Crown Estate in our region
or obviously so down our waterfalls and
and lake areas so again in and on their
rivers we just they will be engaging in
that as well because we did it obviously
have some opportunities with dock
originally before covert so they're
developing shore walls for the region
and walks mentals so there's some
projects that we now have brought
forward again to say Campbell dock
reconsider moving some of us so mister
marking its unspent history in Wagga
have any other questions this is just a
huge thank you Jason to the support you
have operators you know I have been I
figured a little myself and that and the
calls that I get from your Tina are very
encouraging it's very suiting and just
one of the things I just wanted to check
in with you on I let some we do have a
presentation a little bit later
among the territory and I see you've
also given them some support and that's
really great who are reliant on a lot of
the international visitors and I guess
it's lucky for us in some ways that
there's not that many white power
operators at our light on internationals
monetary is probably one of them perhaps
our eyesight so to a certain degree in
servicing international guests but do
you think that there are any other
aspects of white power that are going to
be greatly affected with them to
Nationals because it's really the
biggest you know issues going to be it's
mainly going to be the sports the sports
coach so I think if we can try and get
some of the international sporting
events back up and running as soon as
possible depending on travel
restrictions they would be the main and
paid for wiper but you are correct or
pretty much most of our beans which are
great you know operators pretty much
talk to the domestic market and I still
feel that again look at the Waikato
expressway the other work they
potentially has been put forward for
shovel-ready even extremely nice way
down to pier duty there it's just all
going to help that ease of domestic
travel and we definitely see the push
from self-drive obviously the motor home
in Caribbean Association there going to
be another first leader and mover back
into the region as well which is
fantastic so working with them on a a
traveler around trying to get more
people back into why pass so I think
again your geographic location your
natural environment and also your have
been platform so hold you in a stronger
position around obviously recovering
commute other parts of our region
great okay thanks very much for that
you've got you've done an awful lot of
work and you've got a lot more in front
of you I can see but that's great and if
we've got no more queries or we have a
recommendation do we ever move it please
I think Marcus thinks
clear all in favor please say aye aye
contry no carried thanks very much Jason
all the Beast things maybe I rely on you
thank you in thanks saying good weird
yes I see we have my sorry back Morgan
what I see it and also Kelvin and Andrew
I fear we'll get to you guys before long
but mark from seee him with an airport
yeah
the flora look yours and no just like
Jason I'm you've had a mess of change
for your business so yeah it's he here
you're going on they thanked Andrew and
thanks for the opportunity
welcome to all of the elected members
hopefully we've got a presentation
coming up and it should be before you
now look today I've also got Scott
Kindle my finance manager under one
so Scott will deal with a cup of the
finance slides and as most of what we
have to talk to you about is and the
realms of finance useful to heaven here
preps not quite the presentation I had
intended to present a month ago but as
we know a lot has changed and a massive
amount has changed for route and the in
the last three or four weeks so the
presentation is is primarily and if we
can see I move to the next slide is
primarily around the covert 19 response
for rail but I thought and there's about
eight or nine slides to the key slice to
take you through and I think what you'll
see is how we dealt with the crisis what
the implications have been for the group
now and for the next 15 months and in a
summary that done shed some some
positive light at the end of the tunnel
thanks Sam if we move on so I guess the
first
point I think is useful to you've
obviously received our six-month interim
results some say you're only as good as
your last results but sadly that's not
the not quite the case today but look we
were traveling extremely well very very
good first six months and in fact on
target for a record financial
performance under any measure of hourly
so I for this this financial year but of
course the net led to our draft yes or
why that you've also received and then
of course is now pretty much irrelevant
and I see that you ironically have an
appendix letter to my chair barry harris
about um about our why and as you can
imagine we are working very quickly
towards a revised is a wife for the next
three years particularly the financials
but also there'll be some narrative
change and some priority changing as
well
we have ssa completed a very detailed
fifteen month forecast through the 30
June next year that will form of course
now part of the year one of the obvious
oh I so look we have a we have a
presentation the rail board and myself
has a presentation to all shareholding
councils in May and we by that stage
will have finalized the new drafts so
moving alright moving on to the next
slide so I think now just looking at the
the impact and look very difficult to
well it's very easy to explain in simple
terms it's had a massive impact on the
business but if I divide it into these
four areas that are before you of course
the first result is the aeronautical
business in New Zealand complete issue
no suspension of flights so for us that
was an immediate loss of income really
from April but from the last week of
March and along with our general
aviation
three Harris of flight school basically
you know 97 98 percent lost of our
aeronautical income overnight terminal
plays and we really operating as an
emergency medical service only at the
airport had the same impact on our on
our property but in fact our property is
our lifeline that I will come to but
again really overnight impact on our
tendencies we're quite large landlord as
you know and but to date and Scott will
talk a wee bit about this but to date
we've had good support from our tenants
but we're early days as we know into the
next sort of three to six months as
businesses work through how they're
going to operate and survive during this
process we've obviously suspended the
terminal upgrade work and I'll talk to
that a bit further on which of course
was a major piece of work approximately
fifteen million dollars of of proposed
work a hotel has been so if we can just
go back to the previous slide Sam the
hotel impacted significantly as well
fortunately during April we have it was
taken over by Ministry of Health as a
isolation facility it wasn't required it
was a backup to the Auckland hotels
nonetheless we have received and we are
receiving payment for the use of the
hotel by the government but that ends
really this week and from then on
difficult times ahead and we'll talk
about that and obviously our people and
all my team are working remotely that's
working very very well might sort of 11
or 12 on our immediate code that team
responds but of course the cafe install
staff are at home unable to work and
part of the government subsidy a risk of
fire team does remain on site at this
point so that's really been the impact
what have we really tried to do about it
if we could move to the next slide
[Music]
first of all we we very quickly leading
into probably two weeks before we move
into level 2 and level 3 or before we
even knew what that meant we had worked
very closely with the board around a
pandemic plan how we would operate the
business and more importantly started to
look at some scenario and modeling at
that point that Jason would have
mentioned earlier on as borders such as
China were closing to terrorism we also
saw the writing on the ward on the wall
for our own business so that plan was
developed and approved by the board
before we even went into lockdown we've
completed significant cost reductions
and the business that's right across the
business of it some major cost
reductions in our expense lines
reductions pretty much across our
business in terms of payroll anything up
to a 20% reduction and the board have
also taken a reduction in their director
fees we applied for and received the
government wage subsidy across the group
and with the hotel we worked through and
are still working through with get Park
but they've gone through a full
restructuring exercise number of people
have been made redundant and number have
been retained under the government
subsidy but we have a meeting later this
week with chip park to look at stage 2
Airport association that we parlor was
doing a major piece of work with central
government to try and see what support
of any there are for airport companies
that have been significantly cut issue
no we are we are long term
infrastructure owners and to maintain
the assets so there's a piece of work
going on in that space we already
covered the people we can move to the
next slide the scenario modeling that I
talked about there I think the point
that I will that I'll make here and come
back to at the end is that most airport
companies particularly Regional Airport
companies are significantly hurt and hit
now we are fortunate that that we made
the decision five or six years ago that
the board then under under the
leadership of John Spencer and then
implemented by myself and my team we've
we have as you know diversify the
airport company and that is I guess
bought us time so we have completed a
very conservative model for argument's
sake that assumes no in New Zealand
activity of any of any meaningful sense
before October this year no and then
only a recovery of about 40 percent of
passenger numbers through 2021 calendar
year and well into 2022 before we have a
positive EBIT da really so what is and
we've also taken a very conservative
view of leases of early season ability
to pay us etc no activity out of the
hotel really for the balance of this
Condor year
I so very very conservative but
realistic modeling fortunately we have a
major land sale that is unconditional
and very extremely good family
significant family multinational
business that have agreed to further
provide a letter of credit to the
airport company which gives me
confidence to to build the road so to
speak so that delivers about two and a
half million dollars of margin of free
cash flow into the group early next year
so the reality is that we can get
through this year and through to June 21
almost a slightly positive cash position
the balance sheets taking a bit of a her
and Scott will take you through that but
and also we have some work going on on
Central Precinct and again we have the
ability hopefully to settle some
unconditional land sales with the same
degree of confidence around fear the
sureties which will also feed some
additional cash into the group we've
only utilized about 65% of our of our
debt funding and in fact we have fear
the facilities that we were intending to
take anyway pre covert and we will still
take which will take our funding up to
about 30 million and then we will have
only utilized not much more than 50% of
that by June next year
so most most of the cash burn is funded
out of out of our overdraft during this
period and then the land sales kept
beckon and we're back and positive space
being said very supportive and no no
issues there around funding next slide
please
so we had joined with Hamilton City and
and I had spoken to Gary diet and others
around the obviously the crown
infrastructure projects we have put
forward to applications if you've had a
chance to to review the submission she
might would be aware there are 23
projects we have submitted for the
terminal redevelopment and also for an
amalgam of a number of projects around
the airport that deal with roading
lateral infrastructure our wastewater
plant and various other s speak again is
also worth about 11 million dollars so
we have put person whether we're
successful who knows but under the
terminal redevelopment project we're
ready to go tenders have been received
and Emirate being evaluated the week of
lockdown our consent is in with one with
your council at the moment and that's
well there was
well underway so it is a shovel-ready
project we could be out of the ground
and doing a neighboring works within a
month of a funding line the key for
myself and the board will be what are
the tags that the government apply if we
are successful to the funding mechanism
how much of it is the loan as a grant
etc that's underway a next part of our
recovery program so if we go to the next
slide being important as we work through
really the devastation of the past three
or four weeks to make sure that we still
keep our eye on the longer term for the
group in our our focus over the next 12
months I once been any detailed time
here other than to let you know that we
have a clear set of clear business plan
and a clear set of objectives for FY 21
most of those remain in place we are
reviewing them currently as a management
team but we are trying to make sure that
we continue property as a major
contributor even as you can see there
potentially to shy of eight million
dollars in land sales in this next
12-month period
operations we continue to maintain the
runway fortunately in our ten-year asset
management plan we have a very quiet we
just spent close to a million dollars
finishing in March of this year on some
apron works and some pumps some other
bits and pieces but we have a very quiet
couple expenditure for nautical over the
next 12 to 18 months which couldn't have
come at a better time
but we maintain the assets and you need
to know that we that we will when it
comes to we'll be working very closely
with the New Zealand to try and
obviously kickstart services again and
so our whole marketing and
social media and common strategy will be
around exactly that the hotel is a much
more difficult beast as you would have
gained from Jason's presentation but
look we we are working now closely with
jetpack to understand what a weather
plane coming out the other side may look
like fortunately it's a hotel
that wasn't reliant on international
tourism but it is relaxed on
conferencing in particular and we get to
understand the behavior of the business
community as we go forward in this new
world so we have just almost spending
most of four million on the hotel just
prior to lockdown so it is a it's a it's
a property that we're going to have to
maintain in the meantime in fund and our
conservative modeling does does mean
that the group can fund its interests in
the hotel Sydney for the next 18 months
with limited activity from it and if we
move now into the next slide which is
probably the financial certain couple of
slides here on on sort of financials and
and all its got leader now our
overarching comment here would be you
had a lot of detail in the six-month
interim results so we decided there was
no point in replicating information you
will have read so Scott will summarize
it here and more importantly take you
out the other side of years Brad good
afternoon everyone and thanks max
introduction um yeah I won't dwell too
much on the past because it's
unfortunately you become largely
irrelevant but I guess just some key
takeaways to the slide and what you may
have read already an interim report but
really that momentum we built in the
past couple of years around a
sustainable so recurring revenue basis
through passenger growth in the airport
business I'm sure a property portfolio
that it continued really well for the
first half of the year and you know
obviously without cover the ninth
we expected to continue through the full
year and beyond yeah it's just the
points are properly obviously talking
some big numbers really in sales I guess
that they are laying cells that have
been contemplated under a 10-year plan
the lens doesn't quite line it's not
something that we've done as a knee-jerk
reaction all sort of a fire sale type
arrangement just to get some cash next
couple years
these are on the land with selling as
sort of surplus to your Oracle
requirements affect much of it's
actually physically separated from the
airport through a gallery system so
we're not compromising any core asset
sort of future capability by selling
this land very much as lender service
the airport's that's why it's being sold
off time it has been yes just with the
hotel you see it as a new investment for
us a new industry would be Siddhant
really pleased with the early trading
performance yeah and probably pleasing
that we didn't other than the initial
money to do the property app tenders and
deferred maintenance and things it's
actually traded catch so positive he has
much been profitable with depreciation
and things but really able to repay some
debt and you know the early vital signs
were an occupancy in rem rate have been
have been certainly in line with
expectation and again kind of right up
until February March it was really just
coming into its stride around the
conference center and the food and
beverage offerings so yeah I think you
know it was you know was looking really
positive and hopefully don't the other
side that's the O momentum we can and we
can leverage off again so probably look
look to the future now just move to the
next slide please
yes I've given here just sort of an
six-month increments the remainder of
the financial year
I'm also fighting sure that we're in and
then the following three that are
presented and the drafts then in a
material received I think important to
focus on a bit there because it's sort
of a cash flow
metric for us that includes then sales
but it excludes of course costs like
depreciation which because around three
million dollars here for us which in the
short term there's not necessarily
linear worth they with the investment we
make into assets so seeing
I'll see seeing a reasonably significant
decline in the next and this calendar
year with across the business certainly
gonna suffer omits as we see in that's
sort of early six months between
December twenty and Jo next year that's
the effect of this largely and so I'm
taking your feet I mean as the business
kinda gets back on its feet you can see
it's slowly back to cashflow positive so
I guess you want to compare the read the
read in the blue the blue bars and red
line and the Green Line is subtly we
think we can ahead now you can see
you're definitely next to the fifteen to
eighteen months it's gonna be a bit
painful but after they're pretty much
back on their feet they're not becoming
heavily reliant on our land sales
certainly a person takes 18 months
so we've only seen what's already under
contract and wants unconditional ctul
and those numbers so I think that's the
conservative but realist looking and
conservative conservative on both fronts
I'm sitting at it costs we're looking to
Road out of the business on anything
that's gonna compromise this long term
we're not giving out capability but
either we've built or with managed to
hang on to for as long as we have but
it's um yeah definitely conservative and
look if things don't play out the way
and we see them doing and certainly not
as positive as they might do there's
some opportunities if they're that but
for now it's this sort of as realistic
that we can preserve a current
capability anyway yeah I guess just
overlaid a neat profit slide yeah
there's a lot more probably the deficits
are bigger largely because of the effect
of depreciation but ultimately following
a really similar tree into the cash flow
that layer in sales over the next 18
months will give us cash flow positive
and we expect by the end of bustles to
be largely cashflow positive from it's
recurring trading to be sustainable and
yeah that's probably I guess the main
takeaway there and it's not really built
into the slides but just as much on the
balance sheet like we speak there will
be some impacts to our balance sheet
around property values and those sort of
equity movements so as a shareholder
that obviously will impact your accounts
as well but I guess out of this as a
shareholder and an on fire
or sense out of all of us we're
preserving our core capability and we're
not compromising any of it in nautical
capability I think yet in terms of what
the service will keep delivering that
shouldn't be compromised or at least our
ability to do it that was really all I
had just view the financials somewhat
beep aspect to wrap up this is their
last slide
my apologies that's it we've taken a bit
of your time but look I think the key
themes here really are as I opened up we
hit this situation in a very strong
position and in a very strong balance
sheet a record year the fourth side of
the diversification through our ten-year
group strategy has I think really bought
this company time Pretz unlike some
other regional airports that I think
will need to go to their shareholders
very quickly for additional funding or
through their through their bank funding
lines we don't need to that non revenue
has been absolutely critical to - and in
fact ironically we never predicted a
covert 19 scenario but we did predict a
loss of aeronautical income through
cessation of services or reduce services
so has been one on the same and look
overall the recovery is Scott as
mentioned will be modest but sustainable
and as I want to keep restating we won't
need to go to our core deep at this
stage or funding lines to fund this we
can fund it out of an effective working
capital and most importantly I think for
you as this year holders there is no
requirement for the board to come to its
shareholders for support and we don't
see a scenario at all that that requires
the shareholders to assist the
your company in the foreseeable future
so that's it from me sorry and drug
apologize if we're over time but happy
to take questions if you've got time
yeah no thanks guys I think we were
aware that a bit of extra time was going
to be required for you guys with such a
massive impact and I just got a quick
question about the flight school and
when would they not get back to level
one or possibly could they operate and
level two when in fact scoffs just hit
some advice today it could well be that
the pilots that are that are will
through their qualification will be able
to start flying under level three so as
soon as next week we could see some
flight activity but it will be to your
point Andrew down at level one probably
but there'll be the social distancing
issues when you have an instructor and a
trainee pilot on board so I think where
we still are unclear and so are all
three as to when that will be
I think it's worth noting that we don't
quite know where we're going to go with
all three in the sense that they've got
a hundred one hundred and eighty pilots
currently at the airport and in Hamilton
or out at the accommodation at the
airport so I think we will fight there
fine for the next few months the
question is how whether they're going to
beat the logistics of moving pilots
across borders for training and actually
pilots there is not a dearth of pilots
in the global marketplace as a result of
the catastrophe catastrophe for the
airlines
so I think those two would suggest to us
that we've got difficult times ahead
place the end of 2020 with l3 yeah that
makes sense
yeah I think it's as you've both noted
the stage that you're at with your
property development has been a very
fortunate thing if this had occurred at
the beginning of that it would have been
far more um if I naturally just
but does anyone else have any queries
okay that not be in casework thank you
very much a really comprehensive update
and great to see you recovered from the
shock and being really positive and
constructive going forward so thanks
very much to you both thank you ma'am
yes and I see we have Melvin sorry what
was that ah
okay so we got Kelvin and also as Peter
available yes I am oh great
so thanks Kelvin and Peter um and we'll
get on to the services thanks mr.
chairman and thanks for the opportunity
to speak with you this afternoon you've
been provided with a copy of the
company's statement of intent and half
yearly report to 31 December 2019 and I
I'm conscious of the fact this is the
first opportunity I've had is the newish
chair of the LES to talk to you so I
wanted to start by just briefly
introducing myself and then I wanted to
talk a little bit about the company's
transformation role how are we going to
do things differently what it means for
your counsel and then I want to conclude
with some remarks about covert 19 but I
guess the key point is that certainly
from the board of lessers perspective
the organization has never been more
relevant than it will be in a post
covert 19 recovery period so the first
point I wanted to make is that my family
has been heavily invested in the white
cutoff for a very long time my mother's
family came to this region in 1865 my
father's family came to this region in
1880s and all my family live in the
region my mum lives and kuroky district
my sister lives and Tim's coromandel I
have another system in Hamilton a
brother and Waipa District and after 44
years and
leaving Auckland next week and moving to
Cambridge so we very much look forward
to becoming our district council
ratepayers from the 1st of May so as you
can see my family's been heavily
invested in the success of the region
and it's one of the reasons I took the
job but the other reason is the clarity
of the opportunity and I've spent 21
years in local government governance
across multiple CCOs and and clarity of
role is actually quite unusual in this
case that company's vision is to have
Waikato Council's working together in
the best way possible for the collective
benefit of them and their communities
which means less burden on ratepayers
happier communities council staff and
more effective councils so every as
we've set out in our statement of intent
the organization really exists to do
three things first of all to create
effectiveness and efficiency games for
shareholders such as you secondly to
help increase the influence of the
region and thirdly to help shareholders
provide a better customer experience
what les does is provide an opportunity
to think regionally without boundaries
and to then help councils use that
locally to improve the well-being of the
community
so thinking regionally means that rather
than individual councils trying to solve
their problems individually les can help
them work them out with the costs of
that spread while still allowing local
choices to whether to implement
solutions locally I think that if sphere
to say my observation would be that over
the years of its existence the
organization has done a good job but I
think one of the reasons that I've been
hired is that there was an opportunity
seen to be able to really grasp the
company's potential so when I was high
the board said that it wanted to
undertake a number of transformative
projects at Pace and for that reason we
are going to end our driving the
organisation harder and faster and
earlier this year the board committed to
do
just that we are looking to be bolder
more disruptive to enable you to help
you transform how you and other work at
all councils operate we also won't be
afraid of failing and by that I mean
recognizing that opportunity's worth
pursuing as long as we do it fast
coming from the private sector having
spent 35 years in the private sector my
observation would be that there's
nothing wrong with failure so long as
you fail fast and fail cheap so within
that in mind and looking ahead over the
next 18 months
there are really three core elements to
what we're doing there are some key
strategic projects which will be looking
to advance as fast as possible and
you'll see those projects in the
statement of intent there are some
businesses usual projects and in
addition I've asked for a reexamination
of some of the work that we're doing to
see whether we should stop doing it
as you'll appreciate it it's really
fundamental to perceptions of success of
an organization that they seem to be
making progress month by month so one of
the things we've done is introduced a
lot more careful tracking about what it
is that we're doing and whether we're
being successful and we're looking to
improve the communications to key
council staff as well I've said to my
board colleagues and you'll be aware I'm
sure that the that everyone that sits
around the last board with the exception
of me as a chief executive of one of
them in the council's I've said to my
board colleagues that they are really
the difference between less succeeding
and failing that and the reason for that
is that they are the ones who will
dictate the resourcing and
prioritization and cooperation which is
accorded to less projects and obey the
point pretty clearly that without their
total commitment the organization will
fail but equally their success lesser
success will be their success and vice
versa so turning now to what it means
for your council think three things
first of all you should consider this
organization is an extension of your
vision of building the future together
to promote the well-being of Wipeout
it's people we've both got a role to
play in providing solutions to the
high-growth region of the Waikato we
both recognize the need to do more with
less to drive cost out of local councils
we both want to ensure that nationally
the Waikato region punches above its
weight by showing that the region can
provide them provide joined-up services
across the region and we both want to
improve the well-being of community
indeed it's in your vision secondly as
an organization as I've said before
we're not limited by boundaries we're
tasked with thinking regionally to
enable you to act better locally and I
think the opportunities to work with you
and your companion councils to achieve
your aspirations are boundless
regardless and possibly even more but
cause of covert 19 thirdly obviously by
necessity we need resource to achieve
our outcomes and you'll see that some of
the initiatives that we've proposed in a
statement of intent will require some
upfront investment in order to achieve
some mid to long-term savings now I said
I would finish with a few words on
coronavirus it won't surprise you to
know that as a board we've discussed
very early on whether we should make any
substantive changes to our work
programme to reflect what will be a new
reality what we concluded indeed was
that in fact we should keep doing what
we're doing because it's going to be
even more important moreover it's going
to help rebuild the region and increase
resilience our view is that in a
postcode of 19 period during the
recovery period they'll be need in the
region for at least the following three
things first security of Public Works to
enable a private sector to plan
long-range and I think importantly
commit to training and for this staff to
commit to stay in the region secondly a
demonstration of restraint by public
bodies on what might be perceived as
non-essential spending in other words
doing more with less and thirdly
motivation and encouragement and
development
of current council staff now we're
planning to deliver all of those already
through our work program has set out and
a statement of intent so thank you for
the opportunity to talk to you I
obviously wish that I could have spoken
with you in person but no doubt that'll
opportunity will arise sometimes shortly
in the future Kelvin and I are more than
happy to take any questions mr. chair
but I wondered to Kelvin if there is any
additional points that you want it to
make I welcome and Peter thank you okay
thanks very much for that yeah as you
mentioned less has been active ania ania
between here councils for a number of
years now in being very successful
particularly with rather the road in
accord but what's happening now is an
absolute steep change and I totally
agree with what you said about it being
more important post covert rather than
lease so yeah I wish we were success of
course nail questions I think clear yes
yeah yes thanks Andrew and great to meet
you
you know and good to see you too Kelvin
I'm I did seen through some questions
but on to to ones that I just like to
ask them this forum the first one is
that you know you've made a strong case
for continuing how you're going at the
moment you know that all those things
that you're focusing on will be more
important than ever when we are dealing
in the postcode era I guess um but a lot
of the things that that are done rely on
the I suppose the goodwill of councils
and releasing resources for from their
business to work on less stuff and I can
foresee that councils are actually going
to be pretty hard priests with their own
own
staffing resources dealing with you know
extra things that have come out of the
woodwork to do with covert 19 and so
what assurance can you give us that that
you won't sort of find yourself high and
dry that you can't get that sort of
resource that you do need you know from
the individual councils that have
normally been really supportive because
the idea you started just completely
committed you know to this other work
okay well would you mind if I answer
that question first and then job
maybe there's a few additional points
you want to make i think counselor thank
you that's a that's a great question the
good news is we had I'm happy to say
thought of that as well and one of the
earliest things that we did well before
lockdown was when we could see this
thing coming was to reach out to
councils to ask them to think about
whether in the context of any
redeployment of assets and people that
they were doing whether there were going
to be some people that might affect be
freed up to be able to work on some of
our projects to make them go faster and
I was pleasantly surprised particularly
from some of the smaller councils to be
honest about the positive response that
we got in terms of offering up staff
that's a first point the second point is
that more specifically Calvin's been in
touch with the chief executives of all
of the councils I think as recently as
yesterday Kelvin where we've set out
some specific skill sets that we're
looking for in order to be able to
advance some of our strategic projects
so as I say a great question
surprisingly repository sponsz from that
from the councils that we've reached out
to but you're absolutely right then the
resourcing issue may even flow over time
and it's something we were acutely
conscious of : did you have any point to
it I look I I think that sort of covers
it all off Peter to be honest well it's
really encouraging actually excuse me
could you get that clarification that's
great the other question I had was about
the energy and
carbon management that's mentioned in
the SOI yeah I wasn't sure whether there
is the carbon order that our counselors
sort of before the last election we that
was one of the directions that we gave
the staff that we wanted to get
something organizing that which would
help us I suppose
formulate a plan you know for climate
change net and is the energy management
that's mentioned that most unfeeling
into that audit or not so the short
answer is councilor that no it's well
it's certainly not the audit that you
were referring to I don't see any
particular reason why the people that we
use see that we engage to provide that
support to councils could not help with
that order if there was something that
that what our executive team we're
interested in doing but I'm not actually
privy to the particular the status of
the particular piece of work that you're
referring to I know that Martin lunch
who's one of the guys tends to work with
why Fire District Council has been doing
some bespoke work in this area but I'm
not sure whether it specifically relates
to their report that you're referring to
it okay oh thanks thanks for the
clarification it's okay any more
questions
no okay well thank you very much for for
their presentation and yeah particularly
now in a period of significant change
that's really you know great to see the
positivity we have going forward even
and but with a weird will we have around
us at the moment so yeah thanks Peter
Kelvin very much thank you very much mr.
chair he knows yes and I see Andrew
Michael is available and will talk to us
about the LG FA thank you for the
opportunity and I just maybe make a few
brief comments and then touch on
current environment and then leave some
time for questions so LGF a started in
2012
it currently has 67 member councils were
the number of others and the process of
joining and the current environment has
probably just you know even for the
council's that don't have any did they
realize that you know having access to
finances important sort of probably
speeding up you know be iraq their time
table for joining an OT fa is based on
similar models and the scandinavian
countries the longest of those is
endemic that's been going for 130 years
now so what LG FA wants us to be a very
long-term provider of financing to the
local authority sector the objectives
interests savings on councils did to
provide a range of borrowing options so
short to him in longer term financing
and probably the most important one is
access to deep markets and that's been
the area that specs being the most
challenging and over the past couple of
months in terms of the financials the
profit for the year to June 2020 which
was forecast to be 10 million is on
tricks or even ran the part numbers for
for April yesterday and again them the
monthly profit is on track a lot of the
forecasting that's in the draft II so I
is just out of date it suspense
superseded by the events that we've seen
the last few months but that said just
remember that LG FA has ten billion
dollars of lending to the sector's we
borrowed from investors and on land and
every time we do we take a small margin
so the profit read on all that lending
is locked and until those loans mature
so even though there may well be some
variability in profit a lot of others as
lot turn
that's it the profitability probably
shouldn't be your your primary concern
it as we're councils get the savings as
the savings on the interest costs and
certainty around accessing of Finance so
that's probably the key thing the
current environment interest rates low
so maybe that's one little bit of good
news for for councils so short-term
interest rates counselors like yourself
can borrow below one percent now
longer-term we just completed a 1
billion dollar debt issue just over a
week ago so we borrowed for six years
and we borrowed up 1.4 6% for a billion
dollars so we will add on 20 points to
councils or 25 points to wipe our I
think it is so you'll be accessing
longer to money six year money around
1.7 percent just to give you some idea
of a borrowing costs so that's you know
one bit of good news probably two or
three weeks ago we were receiving recall
borrowing or quiz from councils there's
a lot of councils knowing that maybe you
know fee income is dropping and they
needed to get more money into to cover
that so we've never had a month we have
had a higher amount of borrowing costs
the OGF a was the first count of this
non-government entity
well entity other than the government to
issue in New Zealand since the level
four lockdown was imposed for a while
and Bester's were very reluctant to
invest it's just you know they're
worried even if we buy we won't be able
to sell things and it's just that whole
risk aversion that we had two
developments one was lgf a haber 1
billion dollar standby facility from the
New Zealand government that expires next
year but the minister
finance provided Alisa to LGF a saying
that the government would roll bed over
the period of time so that support from
the government was just a it's really
symbolic to investors that there's going
to be there ongoing support from the
government for what LGF a the second
thing that occurred as the Reserve Bank
announced that they were going to buy
back government bonds and subsequent to
that they added
lgf a to the list of securities that
they are able to buy so they signaled
that buy back up to three billion
dollars of LGF a bonds from investors
and it was that that really gave the
confidence to investors that if we buy
them there's actually going to be
another huge buyer in the market for
that so again you know the level of
support that we're getting from the
government has been extremely important
there's going to be significant
challenges for councils particularly in
the 2021 sort of financial year part of
the working group that dia are running
looking at doing a lot of modeling on
council financial performance this well
for the remainder of this year and in
next year our next feeding into a lot of
the other government sort of work
streams such as the recovery sort of a
weak stream so there's some quite
sobering reading coming out of it for
wipeouts you're probably well positioned
in terms of your deep levels not high
relative to some of the other higher
growth councils in New Zealand so yeah
there are a lot of challenges and that's
probably one of the challenges for us is
that potentially we're going to get
breaches of the financial covenants in
the next financial year not not this
financial year so today we've never had
a breach of the any of the financial
covenants but you know if revenue falls
significantly for councils worth a large
amount of debt to start
then they could well break that
neck-deep - to revenue covenant so
that's something we'll have to deal with
but for those growth councils you know
one of the last tools they've really got
is you know having to cut their capex
and again next not particularly
conducive to starting growth in the
economy and is working against a little
bit of what the government wants to
achieve so I just like to you know we
appreciate that there's no compulsion
for councils to use LG FA you're still
free to borrow from any other sources
that you want so I just like to
acknowledge that can and the steam
because wiper was one of the early
supporters of LG FA we very much value
your support of us and you know the
professional relationship that we have
thanks Andrew I think yeah almost goes
without saying but I'll say at anybody
LG to your face but another great
contributor to the local government seen
generally and certainly well I guess why
power hasn't used your services that
greatly we certainly intend to in the
future possibly even more with Kovac
possibly not we don't know yet do we can
yeah it's um that's true we we don't
know but um yeah but you're very
comforted by their time but at one point
Steven position number three yeah there
does and it was very well priced on
borrowing ability I like the one that
was below 1% even better but he sought
to possibly isn't asked that much know
where it takes Andrew and does anyone
else have any questions
Bruce and then clear you're still muted
Bruce press the spacebar
I don't need to keep creasing it mate
okay I'll change machines one doesn't
work so once in the Bernsen entry just
down page 33 she Kavanagh - white has
got 200 fares and she is at that point
four percent just a simple one
well we're district you've got SS but a
nine point nine never foreseen did you
explain that yes the shareholding is
just something sort of historical so we
know G FA was started at needed 25
million of equity so there was I think
nine or ten councils that were the
initial subscribers and then they won
sold some of the issues to a second
group of councils that came in these
shareholders so LG FA pay a small
dividend to councils on their share
holding that as 2% over acosta funds but
our cluster funds might only be like one
and a half percent at the moment so on a
hundred thousand dollars of shares
you're only going to be getting right
the three or four thousand dollar
dividend so that is really not material
so the level of equity you have is
really not that important it is the
savings that you get on your borrowing
costs that are going to be the big you
know drivers of why you know council
should be means of members of LG obeyed
so it really doesn't give you a lot of
advantage about you know a council bit
as a non shareholder because again the
still getting the same borrowing
benefits that you are it's just simply
effect we needed some councils to put in
some equity to get the thing off off the
ground so again you know we're grateful
for the council's that did that I think
it interested of doubling a figure in
banking and in ordinary terms of
thinking well here the head you get
today so no thank you
I just I just whipped it out for you
Bruce it's it's a rounding thing it's
actually
you got point four four four of a
percent and when you double it you get
point eight eight so it's just rounding
up and down Thank You mr. Chu you're so
knowledgeable all clear
oh yeah thanks Lucretia my head is about
LGA saying one of their principles is
that they'll demonstrate social and
environmental responsibility and one
question that I've been asking and
pastors will LGU they consider
introducing something like green
financing or environmental bonds you
know like the Productivity Commission
did report to a no emissions economy you
know years ago they highlighted that
actually there's a bit of a gap in New
Zealand with this kind of financing
where councils could borrow for a
project that would be you know reducing
emissions or for environmental outcomes
and usually it's at a slight margin
lease or something and just to say it's
a good thing to be doing and we want to
encourage councils and do you think LG
if they would do that or are you talking
to government about that I thank you for
that question that is the whole
environmental issues have been pushed a
little bit to the back at the moment
because that's going on but ODF a stone
a significant amount of work on it and
we are intending to offer green
financing to councils so remembering
that it's not LG FA that is doing things
with the money we just saw and lending
us resources we've actually got all the
documents up and ready to go but the
issue is we're going to need councils to
identify green projects also there's
three categories of this green social
and sustainable so for example a lot of
the water things actually come under
sustainable so there's a whole industry
around it and a revolt involves
identifying things and also there's a
certification process of Dom net so I
could probably speak if
a day on this topic because it as if you
see the documents they you know it must
be like a hundred pages long and we've
got all that really to go so it is all
happening but it will be it's not going
to be compulsory it will be up to each
council is to check how they use that
but green and beasting is a big theme
globally probably particularly in Europe
probably least soem in the US but
certainly it does give you better access
to to deep markets if you can visit the
green framework well I'm thrilled to
hear that you're working on it I
actually think you should report on it
say that you're actually preparing or or
you know working on a proposal because I
think a lot of people would be looking
for that and yeah disable
congratulations are I think it's great
that you made yes some I suppose so
ground with progress and you look
forward to seeing you I mean you can
actually make an announcement
yeah we don't flip we have a council day
each year sort of in July and we did
flag that it was something we intend to
do so we would you know got the update
again this year but it is something
that's definitely happening and we're
more than happy to come and speak to you
if you wanna if you know more in-depth
discussion about about their business
any other questions for Andrew no okay
that being the case thank you very much
for zooming with us and yeah always good
might see you and fleece one of these
days yeah please okay thanks very much
Cheers okay well thanks for that
everybody we have a recommendation that
runs from A to G I'm not even going to
attempt to read them all out Kim yeah
sorry entry probably the thing we just
need to turn our engine to because
because obviously a key part of that and
there's series of recommendations as the
three liters that are in them and the
appendices of open deck some appendix
four five and six
so I do just wonder whether just before
you and before you pop the
recommendation we've read as just with
I'm just seeking in iam any input into
those and those three meters because
obviously when we when we knew to do
proper recommendation you you will be a
century mocking in those weavers
yeah stinks further keen you're very
right I did think of it I read through
them and I felt they've seemed pretty
appropriate as they are because
particularly with Oh custom wine being
there particularly with the airport we
acknowledged that there was going to be
a major revision in theory so I and but
yeah is there anyone does anyone have
any thoughts on a no all good thanks for
that came but I think we're all good
so could I have a mover please thank you
Bruce and a seconder thanks blue cheese
all in favor aye
country no that's carried okay moving on
to item number nine and I see nod as
their king did you want to introduce or
no look I'm and I'm very happy to leave
this sound to - nada to him to take us
through them the financial report yeah I
guess the only thing I'm of significance
a name again there is a health warning
they're a little bit like I'm like the
for monthly report that you saw at the
last council meeting and obviously
anything an item and the forecast column
as yeah obviously outdated by the covert
events Sonya so I'm a huge effort who's
gone and ride across some across council
in the last and the last two or three
weeks to around yet to reef or casting
you should see the results of their pre
forecasting you should have a obviously
a quite a different forecasts column and
the next I'm financial reporting
yeah but they see them happy phone order
to take us through the report thanks
very much thanks Kim
good afternoon everyone so though
currently is standing at the end of
March the total income is currently at
74% of the forecast and the operating
expenditure as a 72 percent of the
four-year forecast we have Vista assets
of 11.8 million recognized to date and
it's currently 94% of the forecasts
discovered assets as 402,000 development
and reserve contributions of 4.4 million
have been received to date and subsidies
and grants are at 47 percent of the
forecast we have capital expenditure
today of 70 1.3 million which is 51
percent of the forecast and there have
been no major budget changes this month
due to a forecasting happening now there
was one arbitrage arrangement made on
the 12th of March that utilized six
million dollars
taught to fix borrowings and it was on
Mitch Toombs maturing and June and will
yield approximately 13,000 of interest
the rates we had the sixty-two point 1
million that's been set for the year
prior year's outstanding Atlas the
sixty-two thousand and we have currently
four hundred and sixty four thousand
outstanding year to date and then I'll
take the rest of our report as being
weird and if anyone's got any questions
okay any questions not a big change
really to the what we represented the
council meeting so
yeah thanks for that nada that's great
and there being no questions I'll ask
for a move for the recommendation
Thank You Roger and a decision
thanks clear thanks Kay I'll catch you
next time Philip all in favor aye aye
country no it's carried thank you very
much and thanks nada and move on to item
team health and safety team oh yeah look
I think I'm a she is Steve yes the first
only us around yeah that's the same suit
new young Steve Sholes baby a and M and
a fake Bevers Bevers well here has
joined us so yeah we know - Steven beef
great welcome Steven beef hi guys
another good news story we need some of
them Steve - want to start off oh yeah
sure all yours or mine okay so am I take
it that you guys have them have read the
report and the attachments to this I do
see that there are a couple of questions
from clear but is there any anything
else that you guys would like to ask
before I get to those questions from
clear looks like the floor is yours
clear he had a couple of questions
yeah well I mean the first one was that
they were for the council entranceways
whether the location of a number of
excellence so if you looked into those
e-tron's ways to see something to do
with entranceways right yeah beer from
you one two three do they give you what
they were
the tow trips and an entrance ways and
we did get property to have a look and
there wasn't anything of significance
that we found 93 can you guys hear me
now yeah
yes I we didn't find anything of
significance of why they tripped the
only thing weak it was thought about the
lip we the doors kind of closed it and
this is it Cambridge so I did property
did have a look at those but we couldn't
find anything that would have caused
those trips and we haven't had any
reported since so it may have been just
one of those things that we are
continuing to monitor anyway yeah yeah I
know that I mean just the our luck that
you know our facilities are the causing
causing a problem for people that are
coming into this year yeah so I just
thought be good to know a bit more about
it yeah okay no can you hear me yes
wonderful I'm so sorry I lost my voice
beer for a minute so I clear I
understood you had another question as
well and that was regarding what ways we
have to keep track of how how the safety
resources and processes are being
utilized yeah there's a really good
question perhaps if I if you go to the
the a3 or the big report on the page
above the health and safety due
diligence plan monitoring above that is
the health and safety lead indicators
now these lead indicators are basically
the resources and the contractors that
we use and so essentially what we pay
for and that's how we monitor and
provide to you the details and what
we're spending our health and safety
budget on we do have a very small health
and safety budget obviously but what
does health and safety lead indicators
shows you is that we we pay an ongoing
fee to the work head of Occupational
Consultancy who deliver our health
monitoring services we also provide
money to the EAP service which is so
provides
I guess counseling services to all of
our staff we also have training health
and safety training so we have set aside
twenty one thousand for health and
safety training and an annual year and
that's that obviously is first aid
refreshers and our health and safety
committee training as well as any
investigation training which we are
looking at at the moment and our regular
conflict training which is obviously
comes out of that budget as well and
these are all reported through these
reporting mechanisms to yourselves and
also to be executive team so I guess
that's one of our due diligence and how
we show that we are utilizing external
resources and finances appropriately I
know that that's a great explanation and
I can see how it all fits together I
guess I was wondering about how you knew
if just individual staff members were
actually you know knowledgeable about
health and safety practices or if they
were studying new tasks or something
that they did actually get the right
briefing and stuff like they're like a
confident that that kind of sort of more
grassroots those processes are working
well as well I think being feel free to
jump in here but I'm actually very
confident because we have some very good
well-educated Health and Safety
representatives now and I must say they
are commits they attend the meetings
they go back to their respective teams
and they disseminate that information
you know we're making sure that any
training his doubts fear I've got bf and
Terry now working with all staff and
specially team leaders and supervisors
about how to keep your staff safe
today yes thank you can you hear me all
right
I can no doesn't seem to be coming
through my headphones I think this is a
great report but the question I have is
is there any way that we can assess some
of the external influences on our team's
health and safety from Corbett 19 yes
absolutely and again be feel free to
jump in here this report only covers the
period from November through February so
critically it misses essentially misses
all the covert 19 that will come in the
next report but yes absolutely we are we
have a staff monitor will start register
which we monitor the health and
well-being of all our staff any that
have immuno compromised health issues we
are aware of where our staff what
they're doing and with our slightly
moving to level three next week we've
gone out to all managers to advise us of
where exactly their staff are going to
be working whether they will be
continuing to work from home whether we
will have some like our parks operators
working back out in the community and
from a health and safety perspective we
are working up some really good
protocols around how to keep them more
safe so I hope hope that's answered your
your question counselor Gordon yeah I
was more wondering about whether any of
the external influences over which we've
got no control you know that they're
actually finding in their own family
circumstances on something like that
that's actually affecting their their
mental state which obviously is a health
and safety issue I can come in here if
you like Steve I'm from I've just coming
out of a webinar with EMA and which one
of New Zealand's leading people and
health or safety Paul javi was part of
so that she rolled out quite a few
ways on how this can be managed and
multiple levels and I know that our
wiper team have been working along those
same lines so you know this is all
pretty new to everybody so we're still
writing up those protocols and and
hopefully getting everything in place
prior to actually going out next week on
level three oh good be great to see
those Thanks great anybody else no I
just like to say it's it's great to see
your health and safety program maturing
each age report that we get and I just
want to say I think your your one-page
Gary's health and safety commitment as a
that's a really really good you know
thing to put in place there's nothing
like everybody in the organization seen
that the Cee is committed to to the
program so congratulations on there she
is well done okay so I have a
recommendation to accept to report to
either Luther please thank you clear
thank you Elwin all those in favor
please say aye aye aye contry no that's
carried thanks ladies says welcome Phil
and we're just going to pass a person
motion to move into public excluded and
then go off live our thanks Roger in a
seconder thanks Susan
all in favor aye I can't we know it's
carried so Sam will let you do your
thing
